---
Author: Kyle Jones Publication_date: September 12, 2024 Canonical_link: "https://medium.com/@kyle-t-jones/navigating-the-complexities-of-sap-for-energy-utilities-e8d60201cfc8" Export_from_medium_date: November 10, 2025
---
# Navigating the Complexities of SAP for Energy & Utilities 90% of

the Fortune 500 use SAP. It is software that changes how companies work and how they are organized. SAP's Enterprise Resource...
### Navigating the Complexities of SAP for Energy & Utilities 90% of the Fortune 500 use SAP. It is software that changes how companies work and how they are organized. SAP's Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) solutions have become the backbone of business operations, handling everything from financials and supply chain management to production planning and sales. SAP is constantly evolving their software stack, with the current focus being SAP RISE. For Energy & Utilities, navigating SAP can be a daunting task, often leading to a reluctance to fully embracing these mission-critical workloads. SAP scope across Energy& Utilities, the challenges of migrating these complex systems to the cloud, and the evolving commercial models like RISE with SAP all contribute to the difficulties faced by Energy & Utilities. #### The Pervasiveness of SAP Before delving into the challenges faced by Energy & Utilities, it's essential to understand the sheer pervasiveness of SAP across the business landscape. [77% of global business transactions](https://x.com/SAP/status/1432797092905373698) touch an SAP system in some way. [94% of SAP](https://www.sap.com/cmp/dg/na-corporate-brand/index.html?campaigncode=crm-ya23-int-2034165&source=ppc-1na-googleads--71700000116288418-58700008619927304-x_x-x-x-x&gad_source=1&gclid=CjwKCAjwooq3BhB3EiwAYqYoEjt1D17TIwlemTjql-dt0dApVwhZTRpV229EZq_1XyUCtyq-w1joqRoCy_oQAvD_BwE&gclsrc=aw.ds) customers cite innovation as a critical factor for their organizations' enterprise modernization efforts. While these numbers are impressive, they also highlight the complexities involved in managing and optimizing SAP systems. #### The Migration Conundrum For Energy & Utilities, the decision to migrate their SAP systems to the cloud can be a double-edged sword. On one hand, the potential benefits of cloud computing, such as scalability, cost optimization, and access to cutting-edge technologies, are undeniable. However, the process of migrating these mission-critical workloads is fraught with challenges. The migration process itself can be classified into two categories: homogeneous and heterogeneous. A homogeneous migration involves a straightforward lift-and-shift approach, where the existing SAP system is moved to the cloud without any underlying platform changes. Heterogeneous migrations, on the other hand, involve transitioning to a new operating system, database, or SAP software version, adding another layer of complexity to the process. #### Ecosystem Considerations One of the most significant challenges Energy & Utilities face when migrating their SAP systems is the intricate web of integrations and dependencies that surround these monolithic applications. When I talk to customers about ERP migration, we are not just focusing on getting the ECC (SAP's classic ERP solution) or S/4HANA (SAP's next-generation ERP solution) moving. Every customer will have either some solutions like Hyperion as a financial consolidation platform, BPC as a financial consolidation platform, but they also have several different solutions that they consume. This ecosystem of interconnected systems, ranging from sales and manufacturing to financial and analytics solutions, complicates the migration process. Energy & Utilities must carefully evaluate the real-time integrations and batch processing requirements to ensure seamless data flow and minimize disruptions to critical business operations. #### The Role of AWS in SAP Migrations AWS has been running SAP workloads in the cloud since 2008. One of the key differentiators that AWS offers for SAP workloads is its cloud-native, high-memory instances. AWS owns and builds its infrastructure from the ground up, offering unmatched performance and scalability for memory-intensive SAP HANA databases. AWS provides a range of services and solutions tailored specifically for SAP environments. These include [Amazon AppFlow](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/appflow/latest/userguide/sapodata.html), a low-code solution for extracting data from SAP systems and integrating it into data lakes, and Amazon CloudWatch Application Insights for monitoring SAP HANA databases (with plans to extend this to the application layer in the future). #### The Rise of RISE with SAP SAP launched a new commercial offering called "RISE with SAP" in 2021. RISE shifts customers from a perpetual licensing model to a subscription-based, consumption-driven model. Under this offering, SAP provides the software licenses and manages the underlying infrastructure and technical services. While RISE with SAP presents an opportunity for Energy & Utilities to streamline their SAP operations. #### The Data Lake Opportunity As enterprises look to get the most out of their data investments, the concept of a centralized data lake has gained traction. For Energy & Utilities with SAP systems, leveraging tools like Amazon AppFlow to connect data from different applications and integrate it into a data lake can unlock new opportunities for analytics, AI, and machine learning. ####

Navigating the Complexities with AWS Expertise While the challenges faced by Energy & Utilities in managing and migrating their SAP systems are multifaceted, AWS offers a wealth of expertise and resources to help navigate these complexities. By leveraging the collective knowledge of AWS solution architects, Energy & Utilities can gain insights into best practices, proven architectures, and innovative approaches to optimizing their SAP environments. This collaborative approach enables Energy & Utilities to strike the right balance between leveraging SAP's functionalities and embracing the agility and scalability of cloud-native solutions. #### The AWS Advantage: Nitro and High-Memory Instances One of the key differentiators that AWS brings to the table for SAP workloads is its Nitro system and cloud-native high-memory instances. AWS is the only cloud provider that offers cloud-native, high-memory instances like 12 TB, 18 TB, and 24 TB. The AWS Nitro system also provides a key advantage, as it ensures that the entire 8 vCPU and 64 GB of memory are available to the SAP application, with no overhead from the hypervisor. #### Automation and Accelerated Deployments AWS offers a range of automation and deployment tools to streamline the process of setting up and managing SAP environments. One such tool is the AWS Launch Wizard, which allows customers to deploy a new SAP system in less than an hour, including the operating system, database, and SAP configuration. AWS provides backup and recovery solutions for SAP HANA databases, allowing customers to directly backup to Amazon S3. For traditional databases like Oracle and SQL Server, AWS offers solutions to backup to local disks and then move the backups to S3, ensuring robust data protection. #### Embracing SAP Clean Core and Enterprise Analytics As Energy & Utilities grapple with the complexities of SAP, another area of focus is the concept of "SAP Clean Core." This approach involves minimizing customizations and modifications to the core SAP codebase, which can simplify upgrades and reduce the overall complexity of the system. AWS and SAP are collaborating to enable enterprise-wide analytics by integrating SAP data into data lakes. #### Navigating the SAP Ecosystem with AWS Expertise In the ever-evolving landscape of enterprise software, SAP remains a critical component for countless organizations. For Energy & Utilities tasked with managing and optimizing these mission-critical workloads, the complexities can seem daunting. However, by partnering with AWS and using its expertise in SAP migrations, cloud-native architectures, and data lake integrations, Energy & Utilities can navigate these challenges with confidence. SAP can be complicated, but customers don't need to navigate it alone.
### Related Stories - [[12 Supply Chain Opportunities in Energy & Utilities](https://medium.com/@kylejones_47003/12-supply-chain-opportunities-in-energy-utilities-6794edf52aa8)] - [[SCADA on AWS: Architectural Approaches for Security and Resilience Control Systems](https://medium.com/@kylejones_47003/scada-systems-to-the-aws-cloud-architectural-approaches-for-enhanced-security-and-resilience-9d97878eb53e)] - [[Modernizing High-Performance Computing

for the Power Grid: Leveraging AWS to Enable Scalable...](https://medium.com/@kylejones_47003/modernizing-high-performance-computing-for-the-power-grid-leveraging-aws-to-enable-scalable-516944d7ac14)]
